---
sidebar_position: 00.02
---

# Protecting against phishing
========================


While phishing may be the most common form of attack on the cybersecurity threat landscape, there are straightforward ways to protect against it. Let's look at five steps you can take which can reduce your exposure to the threat of phishing. First, implement controls to block spam. Since phishing is a form of spam emails, the better you get at blocking spam, the more you'll be protecting yourself from phishing. Users can control spam at their inbox by flagging unwanted emails as junk. And organizations can block spam at the email server by blacklisting known spammers and even blocking emails from entire domains or IP address ranges. The next way to protect against phishing is to block access to fraudulent and malicious websites. This can be done at the user level by accessing the internet only with web browsers that show a warning if users attempt to go to a fraudulent site. Most modern browsers have security settings that can be configured to do this. Also, organizations can install firewalls or proxy servers that prevent users from accessing known bad websites. The third step you can take is to use a password manager. This is a digital safe that can generate and store strong and unique passwords for any site that needs one. That way, you're not reusing the same passwords on different websites. So, even if one of your passwords get compromised in a phishing attack, it won't work anywhere else. Fourth is multifactor authentication. This is a stronger form of authentication than just passwords. It requires a password, plus at least a device you have or a biometric factor, like a fingerprint. That way, even if the attacker gets your username and password, they can't log in without the other factor. Finally, we have security training. If users know not to open phishing emails and click on manipulated links, phishing wouldn't be such a serious problem. Teach users how to recognize phishing attacks. Explain why they should be suspicious of urgent emails and how to hover over links to see if they're legitimate or not. You can also conduct phishing simulations to test how many users might fall for an actual phishing attack. Implementing these and the other controls I covered in this video will help protect you and your organization from the threat of phishing.